README.md, before:

# Opensource toolchain tutorial for Espressif ESP8266

For ESP32 series, please refer to https://github.com/cjacker/opensource-toolchain-esp32, and ESP32-C2/C3 is recommended to use instead to replace ESP8266.

The ESP8266 is a low-cost Wi-Fi microchip, with built-in TCP/IP networking software, and microcontroller capability, produced by Espressif Systems in Shanghai, China. The chip was popularized in the English-speaking maker community in August 2014 via the ESP-01 module, made by a third-party manufacturer Ai-Thinker. This small module allows microcontrollers to connect to a Wi-Fi network and make simple TCP/IP connections using Hayes-style commands. 

**Features**

- Processor: L106 32-bit RISC microprocessor core based on the Tensilica Diamond Standard 106Micro running at 80 or 160 MHz
- Memory:
  + 32 KiB instruction RAM
  + 32 KiB instruction cache RAM
  + 80 KiB user-data RAM
  + 16 KiB ETS system-data RAM
- External QSPI flash: up to 16 MiB is supported (512 KiB to 4 MiB typically included)
- IEEE 802.11 b/g/n Wi-Fi
  + Integrated TR switch, balun, LNA, power amplifier and matching network
  + WEP or WPA/WPA2 authentication, or open networks
- 17 GPIO pins
- Serial Peripheral Interface Bus (SPI)
- I²C (software implementation)
- I²S interfaces with DMA (sharing pins with GPIO)
- UART on dedicated pins, plus a transmit-only UART can be enabled on GPIO2
- 10-bit ADC (successive approximation ADC)

# Table of contents
- [Hardware prerequiest](#hardware-prerequiest)
- [Toolchain overview](#toolchain-overview)
- [Compiler](#compiler)
- [SDK](#sdk)
  + [ESP8266_RTOS_SDK](#esp8266_rtos_sdk)
  + [ESP8266_NONOS_SDK](#esp8266_nonos_sdk)
- [Programming](#programming)
  + [ESP8266_RTOS_SDK](#esp8266_rtos_sdk-1)
  + [ESP8266_NONOS_SDK](#esp8266_nonos_sdk-1)
- [Debugging](#debugging)
- [Classic AT firmware for ESP-1S](#classic-at-firmware-for-esp8266)
- [AT-MQTT firmware for ESP-1S](#at-mqtt-firmware-for-esp-1s)

# Hardware prerequiest
- ESP8266 devboard
  + I use D1 mini (4M Flash) and An-Thinker ESP-1S in this tutorial

# Toolchain overview
- Compiler: Xtensa L106 GNU Toolchain
- SDK: ESP8266_RTOS_SDK / ESP8266_NONOS_SDK (**deprecated**)
- Programming Tool: esptool integrated in SDK
- Debugging: UART log

# Compiler

Espressif provide pre-built Xtensa L106 GNU toolchain, you can download it from:
- for 64bit Linux: https://dl.espressif.com/dl/xtensa-lx106-elf-gcc8_4_0-esp-2020r3-linux-amd64.tar.gz
- for 32bit Linux: https://dl.espressif.com/dl/xtensa-lx106-elf-gcc8_4_0-esp-2020r3-linux-i686.tar.gz

After download finished, extract it as:
```
sudo tar xf xtensa-lx106-elf-gcc8_4_0-esp-2020r3-linux-amd64.tar.gz -C /opt
```

It has well-formed dir name `xtensa-lx106-elf` and it is also the triplet of Xtensa L106 GNU Toolchain.

Do not forget to add `/opt/xtensa-lx106-elf/bin` to PATH env of your shell.


# SDK
## ESP8266_RTOS_SDK

Espressif released two versions of the SDK — one is [ESP8266_RTOS_SDK](https://github.com/espressif/ESP8266_RTOS_SDK) based FreeRTOS and the other is ESP8266_NONOS_SDK which already deprecated. This tutorial will focus on [ESP8266_RTOS_SDK](https://github.com/espressif/ESP8266_RTOS_SDK), since it is supported and still maintained by upstream.

### setup the SDK

I put the sdk in `~/esp` dir.
```
mkdir ~/esp && cd ~/esp
git clone https://github.com/espressif/ESP8266_RTOS_SDK.git
cd ESP8266_RTOS_SDK
git submodule update --init --recursive --progress
```
You can also use the release version as you like, as this tutorial written, the latest stable release is v3.4.

An env var need exported to find the SDK:
```
export IDF_PATH=$HOME/esp/ESP8266_RTOS_SDK
```
And you also need install some python modules the SDK required:
```
python -m pip install --user -r $IDF_PATH/requirements.txt
```

### build hello_world demo
There is some examples provided by ESP8266_RTOS_SDK, you can build the hello_world example as:
```
cd ~/esp/ESP8266_RTOS_SDK/examples/get-started/hello_world
make
```

When build hello_world first time, it will invoke `make menuconfig` to generate `sdkconfig` file, you can tune some options as your need. The `menuconfig` can be invoke by `make menuconfig`, you can use `make help` to find more usages.

After build successfully, the 'hello_world.bin/elf` will be generated at `build` dir.


## ESP8266_NONOS_SDK

Non-OS SDK is not based on an operating system. And deprecated from December 2019, but there are still a lot of users stay with Non-OS SDK

### Setup the SDK

I put the sdk in `~/esp` dir.
```
mkdir -p ~/esp && cd ~/esp
git clone https://github.com/espressif/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK.git
cd ESP8266_NONOS_SDK
git submodule update --init --recursive --progress
```

You can also use the release version as you like, as this tutorial written, the latest stable release is v3.0.5

And since all python script in Non-OS SDK is python2, you should fix the python version issue as:
```
sed -i "s/@python /@python2 /g" ~/esp/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK/Makefile
```

Not like ESP8266_RTOS_SDK, it doesn't support 'out-of-sdk' projects, you have to put your project at SDK dir, for example, use `blink-nonos` demo in this repo as example, you should put it to `~/esp/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK` dir.
```
cp -r blink-nonos ~/esp/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK
```

### Build blink-nonos demo

#### with gen_misc.sh

You can use `gen_misc.sh` to build nonos project as:

```
cd ~/esp/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK/blink-nonos
./gen_misc.sh
```
There are some questions you need answer, here I used D1 mini with 4M Flash:
```
gen_misc.sh version 20150511

Please follow below steps(1-5) to generate specific bin(s):
STEP 1: choose boot version(0=boot_v1.1, 1=boot_v1.2+, 2=none)
enter(0/1/2, default 2):
1
boot mode: new

STEP 2: choose bin generate(0=eagle.flash.bin+eagle.irom0text.bin, 1=user1.bin, 2=user2.bin)
enter (0/1/2, default 0):
1
generate bin: user2.bin

STEP 3: choose spi speed(0=20MHz, 1=26.7MHz, 2=40MHz, 3=80MHz)
enter (0/1/2/3, default 2):
3
spi speed: 80 MHz

STEP 4: choose spi mode(0=QIO, 1=QOUT, 2=DIO, 3=DOUT)
enter (0/1/2/3, default 0):
2
spi mode: DIO

STEP 5: choose spi size and map
    0= 512KB( 256KB+ 256KB)
    2=1024KB( 512KB+ 512KB)
    3=2048KB( 512KB+ 512KB)
    4=4096KB( 512KB+ 512KB)
    5=2048KB(1024KB+1024KB)
    6=4096KB(1024KB+1024KB)
    7=4096KB(2048KB+2048KB) not support ,just for compatible with nodeMCU board
    8=8192KB(1024KB+1024KB)
    9=16384KB(1024KB+1024KB)
enter (0/2/3/4/5/6/7/8/9, default 0):
4
spi size: 4096KB
spi ota map:  512KB + 512KB


start...
```

And it will start build automatically, the output looks like:
```
Support boot_v1.2 and +
Generate user2.4096.new.4.bin successully in folder bin/upgrade.
boot.bin------------>0x00000
user1.4096.new.4.bin--->0x1000
```

You can also choose `2` when 
```
STEP 2: choose bin generate(0=eagle.flash.bin+eagle.irom0text.bin, 1=user1.bin, 2=user2.bin)
```
And the final user firmware will be `user2.4096.new.4.bin` and should program to `0x81000`.

The `user1.bin` and `user2.bin` is something related to FOTA (firmware over the air), it is a update mechanism, you can treat it as AB system for now, if A running, then update B and switch to B. For this simple blink demo, use `user1.bin` or `user2.bin` or both as you like.

#### with make

```
make COMPILE=gcc BOOT=new APP=1 SPI_SPEED=80 SPI_MODE=DIO SPI_SIZE_MAP=4
```
Or use `APP=2` 
```
make COMPILE=gcc BOOT=new APP=2 SPI_SPEED=80 SPI_MODE=DIO SPI_SIZE_MAP=4
```
You may be confused which one should choose when running `gen_misc.sh` and which option should used with `make`, I will explain it next section.

**NOTE :** Partition table 

Partition table was introduced from NonOS SDK v3.0, you have to add user_pre_init() in your project, which will be called before user_init(). And you MUST call system_partition_table_regist() in user_pre_init to register your project partition table. Otherwise you may encounter rebooting loop issue with serial output `rf_cal[0] !=0x05,is 0xFF`.


# Programming

Connect the USB typec or micro port of ESP8266 devboard to USB PC port, usually there is a UART chip integrated on board and you should find `/dev/ttyACM0` or `/dev/ttyUSB0` created after devboard plugged in.

## ESP8266_RTOS_SDK
Then you can program the target device as:
```
make flash
```
Or flash just the app when you flashed this project one time already
```
make app-flash
```

`hello_world` demo is an UART demo, you can use serial terminal to monitor it, SDK provided a python tool named idf_monitor.py, you can use it as:
```
make monitor
```

The output of `hello_world` demo looks like:
```
--- idf_monitor on /dev/ttyUSB0 74880 ---
--- Quit: Ctrl+] | Menu: Ctrl+T | Help: Ctrl+T followed by Ctrl+H ---
load 0x40100000, len 7544, room 16
tail 8
chksum 0xee
load 0x3ffe8408, len 24, room 0
tail 8
chksum 0x67
load 0x3ffe8420, len 3472, room 0
tail 0
chksum 0x51
csum 0x51
I (46) boot: ESP-IDF v3.4-75-g7973d71b-dirty 2nd stage bootloader
I (46) boot: compile time 21:17:52
I (47) qio_mode: Enabling default flash chip QIO
I (55) boot: SPI Speed      : 40MHz
I (61) boot: SPI Mode       : QIO
I (67) boot: SPI Flash Size : 2MB
I (73) boot: Partition Table:
...
```

You can also use tio as:
```
tio -b 74880 /dev/ttyUSB0
```

The baudrate can be setup and found in `sdkconfig`.

## ESP8266_NONOS_SDK

After blink-nonos demo built successfully, enter `~/esp/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK/bin` dir.

You will find these files:
- boot_v1.2.bin / boot_v1.6.bin / boot_v1.7.bin, boot firmware provided by SDK.
- esp_init_data_default_v05.bin / esp_init_data_default_v08.bin, the default init data provided by SDK.
- upgrade/user1.4096.new.4.bin, user1 firmware.
- upgrade/user2.4096.new.4.bin, user2 firmware if you built it again with `APP=2`.

For first time programming:
```
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 erase_flash
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0 boot_v1.7.bin
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0x1000 upgrade/user1.4096.new.4.bin
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0x81000 upgrade/user2.4096.new.4.bin
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0x3fc000 esp_init_data_default_v08.bin
```

You can also combine these together:
```
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash \
-e -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB \
0x00000 boot_v1.7.bin \
0x1000 upgrade/user1.4096.new.4.bin \
0x81000 upgrade/user2.4096.new.4.bin \
0x3fc000 esp_init_data_default_v08.bin
```

If you already have these firmware programmed, you can only update the user firmware as:

```
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200  write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0x1000 upgrade/user1.4096.new.4.bin
```
Or
```
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200  write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0x81000 upgrade/user2.4096.new.4.bin
```

**NOTE**, the `-fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB` should match exactly what you speficied with `make` or what you input when running `gen_misc.sh` to build the project.

And let's explain some inputs to `gen_misc.sh` when building this project:

### why program user2 firmware to 0x81000 ?

We know user1 should always program to `0x1000`. why program user2 firmware to 0x81000 ?

Actually, the target address depend on flash size, you can program `boot_v1.7.bin` to target device as:

```
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 erase_flash
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0 boot_v1.7.bin
```

Then use tio to open the serial port:

```
tio -b 74880 /dev/ttyUSB0
```

Then reset the target device, the output should look like:
```
2nd boot version : 1.7
  SPI Speed      : 80MHz
  SPI Mode       : DIO
  SPI Flash Size & Map: 32Mbit(512KB+512KB)
no GPIO select!
jump to run user2 @ 81000
```
The line `jump to run user2 @ 81000` tell us user2 firmware should program to 0x81000. Since the start addr of user2 depends on flash size, so you need to be very careful to provide correct args for `esptool.py` when programming.

### why program `esp_init_data_default_v08.bin` to `0x3fc000` ?

It is defined by partition table introduced from NONOS SDK v3.0, refer to [blink-nonos/user/partitions.c](./blink-nonos/user/partitions.c) for more information, usually:

- 0x7c000 for 512K flash
- 0xfc000 for 1M flash
- 0x1fc000 for 2M flash
- 0x3fc000 for 4M flash

# Debugging

There is no JTAG debugging support for ESP8266, although there is [some work to openocd](https://www.esp8266.com/viewtopic.php?f=9&t=1871) already done, but as I verified, they all don't work.

You have to use UART log to debug ESP8266 as mentioned above, such as `make monitor` or `tio -b 74880 /dev/ttyUSB0`.


# Classic AT firmware for ESP8266

The latest classic AT firmware is **v1.7.5** provided by ESP8266_NONOS_SDK. Since The most common devices that use ESP8266 is ESP-1S module, I will introduce how to build and flash at firmware of ESP-1S in the first section.

For usage of classic AT firmware, please refer to official document [ESP8266 Non-OS AT Instruction Set](https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/4a-esp8266_at_instruction_set_en.pdf).

## ESP-1S

Since I don't have ESP-1 module, I will use ESP-1S as example, ESP-1S has 1M flash and ESP-1 has only 512K flash, it will affect building options, you should change it if you have a ESP-1 module.

### Check AT firmware version

Since ESP-1S module has no UART chip integrated on board, you have to use a external USB2TTL adapter and wire it up as:

| USB2TTL | ESP-1S |
|---------|--------|
| 3v3     | 3v3    |
| GND     | GND    |
| TX      | RX     |
| RX      | TX     |

NOTE, **DO NOT use 5V power supply, ESP-1S is 3V3 tolerance.**

And use tio as:
```
tio -b 115200 -m ONLCRNL /dev/ttyUSB0 
```
or picocom
```
picocom -b 115200 --omap crcrlf /dev/ttyUSB0
```
And input:
```
AT+GMR
```
The output look like :
```
AT version:1.7.5.0(Oct  9 2021 09:26:04)
SDK version:3.0.5(b29dcd3)
compile time:Mar 16 2023 13:20:21
OK
```

Here I already updated to latest v1.7.5 version. if not, you can build and update the firmware by your self.

Because AT commands must be terminated with both the CR and LF ASCII control codes, I use `-m ONLCRNL` with tio or `--omap crcrlf` with picocom, otherwise, you have to use `Ctrl-M Ctrl-J` instead of `Enter` key.


### build and flash at_nano firmware

For ESP-1S, since it has 1M flash, it can only use `at_nano` firmware which supports an SSL library with fewer ciphers but fits on 1 MB of flash memory.

You can use some ESP-1S Dock to flash ESP-1S. if you do not have one, wire it up with a USB2TTL adapter as:

| USB2TTL | ESP-1[S] |
|---------|----------|
| 3v3     | 3v3      |
| 3v3     | RST      |
| 3v3     | EN       |
| 3v3     | GPIO2    |
| GND     | GND      |
| GND     | GPIO0    |
| RX      | TX       |
| TX      | RX       |

Note again, **DO NOT use 5V power supply, ESP-1S is 3V3 tolerance.**

#### To build at_nano firmware for ESP-1S
```
cd ESP8266_NONOS_SDK
cp -r examples/at_nano . && cd at_nano
make COMPILE=gcc BOOT=new APP=1 SPI_SPEED=80 SPI_MODE=DIO SPI_SIZE_MAP=2
```

The output looks like:
```
Support boot_v1.2 and +
Generate user1.1024.new.2.bin successully in folder bin/upgrade.
boot.bin------------>0x00000
user1.1024.new.2.bin--->0x01000
```

#### to flash to ESP-1S
After `user1.1024.new.2.bin` generated, program it to ESP-1S as:
```
cd <where you put>/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK/bin
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash \
    -e \
    -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 1MB \
    0x00000 boot_v1.7.bin \
    0x01000 upgrade/user1.1024.new.2.bin \
    0xfc000 esp_init_data_default_v08.bin
```

Actually, it can be used to program to 2M or 4M flash size too.

After firemware programmed, please refer to above "Check AT firmware version" section to verify it.

I also put a copy at [esp-1s-at-firmware-v1.7.5](./esp-1s-at-firmware-v1.7.5) dir in this repo, you can use `flash-at_nano-to-esp-1s.sh` to program it to ESP-1S.

## Other 8266 devboards

It's simpler to program at firmware for various ESP8266 devboards. Most of them have a UART chip integrated, it's not necessary to care about how to wire up, and most of them has 2M or 4M flash, `at` firmware can be used instead of `at_nano`.

### build at firmware
Use d1 mini with 4M flash as example.

```
cd ESP8266_NONOS_SDK
cp -r examples/at . && cd at
make COMPILE=gcc BOOT=new APP=1 SPI_SPEED=80 SPI_MODE=DIO SPI_SIZE_MAP=6
```

The output looks like:
```
Support boot_v1.4 and +
Generate user1.4096.new.6.bin successully in folder bin/upgrade.
boot.bin------------>0x00000
user1.4096.new.6.bin--->0x01000
```

#### to flash to D1 mini
After `user1.4096.new.6.bin` generated, program it to ESP-1S as:
```
cd <where you put>/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK/bin
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash \
    -e \
    -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB \
    0x0000 boot_v1.7.bin \
    0x1000 upgrade/user1.4096.new.6.bin \
    0x3fc000 esp_init_data_default_v08.bin \
```

After programming finished, you can verify it by `tio -b 115200 /dev/ttyUSB0 -m ONLCRNL`:
```
$ tio -b 115200 /dev/ttyUSB0 -m ONLCRNL
[14:59:57.369] tio v2.5
[14:59:57.369] Press ctrl-t q to quit
[14:59:57.370] Connected
AT

OK

AT+GMR
AT version:1.7.5.0(Oct  9 2021 09:26:04)
SDK version:3.0.5(b29dcd3)
compile time:Mar 16 2023 13:14:07
OK
```


# AT-MQTT firmware for ESP-1S

[ESP-AT](https://github.com/espressif/esp-at) firmware for ESP8266 is newer than classic AT firmware, sometimes it also refers to `AT-MQTT` firmware. it is based on ESP8266_RTOS_SDK and the latest version is v2.2.1.0.

> v2.2.1.0_esp8266 is the last version of ESP-AT for ESP8266, corresponding to branch release/v2.2.0.0_esp8266, corresponding to documentation https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-at/en/release-v2.2.0.0_esp8266.

<strike>
  
The building process should be:
```
git clone https://github.com/espressif/esp-at.git
cd esp-at
./build.py menuconfig
```
Then you will be prompted to config some options as:
```
Platform name:
1. PLATFORM_ESP32
2. PLATFORM_ESP8266
3. PLATFORM_ESP32S2
4. PLATFORM_ESP32C3
choose(range[1,4]):2

Module name:
1. WROOM-02 (description: TX:15 RX:13)
2. WROOM-5V2L (description: 5V UART level)
3. ESP8266_1MB (description: No OTA)
4. WROOM-02-N (description: TX:1 RX:3)
5. WROOM-S2
6. ESP8266_QCLOUD (description: QCLOUD TX:15 RX:13)
choose(range[1,6]):3

Enable silence mode to remove some logs and reduce the firmware size?
0. No
1. Yes
choose(range[0,1]):0
```

After menu show up, go to `Component config -> Common ESP-related -> UART for console output` and choose `UART0 (TX1 RX3)`.

Then built it as:
```
./build.py build
```

</strike>

As I tried, the latest codes already broken and not work with ESP-1S.

The latest workable firmware can be downloaded from https://github.com/espressif/esp-at/issues/606#issuecomment-1033569789. And it is built at Jul 11 2021.

I also put a copy at [esp-1s-at-mqtt-firmware-v2.2](./esp-1s-at-mqtt-firmware-v2.2) dir in this repo, you can use `flash-at_mqtt-to-esp-1s.sh` to program it to ESP-1S.

After programming finished, you can verify it by `tio -b 115200 /dev/ttyUSB0 -m ONLCRNL`:
```
$ tio -b 115200 /dev/ttyUSB0 -m ONLCRNL

AT+GMR
AT version:2.2.0.0(s-b097cdf - ESP8266 - Jun 17 2021 12:58:29)
SDK version:v3.4-22-g967752e2
compile time(6800286):Jul 11 2021 11:09:32
Bin version:2.2.0(ESP8266_1MB)

OK
```

Commit message:

add ai-thinker at-mqtt 2.3dev firmware

README.md, after:

# Opensource toolchain tutorial for Espressif ESP8266

For ESP32 series, please refer to https://github.com/cjacker/opensource-toolchain-esp32, and ESP32-C2/C3 is recommended to use instead to replace ESP8266.

The ESP8266 is a low-cost Wi-Fi microchip, with built-in TCP/IP networking software, and microcontroller capability, produced by Espressif Systems in Shanghai, China. The chip was popularized in the English-speaking maker community in August 2014 via the ESP-01 module, made by a third-party manufacturer Ai-Thinker. This small module allows microcontrollers to connect to a Wi-Fi network and make simple TCP/IP connections using Hayes-style commands. 

**Features**

- Processor: L106 32-bit RISC microprocessor core based on the Tensilica Diamond Standard 106Micro running at 80 or 160 MHz
- Memory:
  + 32 KiB instruction RAM
  + 32 KiB instruction cache RAM
  + 80 KiB user-data RAM
  + 16 KiB ETS system-data RAM
- External QSPI flash: up to 16 MiB is supported (512 KiB to 4 MiB typically included)
- IEEE 802.11 b/g/n Wi-Fi
  + Integrated TR switch, balun, LNA, power amplifier and matching network
  + WEP or WPA/WPA2 authentication, or open networks
- 17 GPIO pins
- Serial Peripheral Interface Bus (SPI)
- I²C (software implementation)
- I²S interfaces with DMA (sharing pins with GPIO)
- UART on dedicated pins, plus a transmit-only UART can be enabled on GPIO2
- 10-bit ADC (successive approximation ADC)

# Table of contents
- [Hardware prerequiest](#hardware-prerequiest)
- [Toolchain overview](#toolchain-overview)
- [Compiler](#compiler)
- [SDK](#sdk)
  + [ESP8266_RTOS_SDK](#esp8266_rtos_sdk)
  + [ESP8266_NONOS_SDK](#esp8266_nonos_sdk)
- [Programming](#programming)
  + [ESP8266_RTOS_SDK](#esp8266_rtos_sdk-1)
  + [ESP8266_NONOS_SDK](#esp8266_nonos_sdk-1)
- [Debugging](#debugging)
- [Classic AT firmware for ESP-1S](#classic-at-firmware-for-esp8266)
- [AT-MQTT firmware for ESP-1S](#at-mqtt-firmware-for-esp-1s)

# Hardware prerequiest
- ESP8266 devboard
  + I use D1 mini (4M Flash) and An-Thinker ESP-1S in this tutorial

# Toolchain overview
- Compiler: Xtensa L106 GNU Toolchain
- SDK: ESP8266_RTOS_SDK / ESP8266_NONOS_SDK (**deprecated**)
- Programming Tool: esptool integrated in SDK
- Debugging: UART log

# Compiler

Espressif provide pre-built Xtensa L106 GNU toolchain, you can download it from:
- for 64bit Linux: https://dl.espressif.com/dl/xtensa-lx106-elf-gcc8_4_0-esp-2020r3-linux-amd64.tar.gz
- for 32bit Linux: https://dl.espressif.com/dl/xtensa-lx106-elf-gcc8_4_0-esp-2020r3-linux-i686.tar.gz

After download finished, extract it as:
```
sudo tar xf xtensa-lx106-elf-gcc8_4_0-esp-2020r3-linux-amd64.tar.gz -C /opt
```

It has well-formed dir name `xtensa-lx106-elf` and it is also the triplet of Xtensa L106 GNU Toolchain.

Do not forget to add `/opt/xtensa-lx106-elf/bin` to PATH env of your shell.


# SDK
## ESP8266_RTOS_SDK

Espressif released two versions of the SDK — one is [ESP8266_RTOS_SDK](https://github.com/espressif/ESP8266_RTOS_SDK) based FreeRTOS and the other is ESP8266_NONOS_SDK which already deprecated. This tutorial will focus on [ESP8266_RTOS_SDK](https://github.com/espressif/ESP8266_RTOS_SDK), since it is supported and still maintained by upstream.

### setup the SDK

I put the sdk in `~/esp` dir.
```
mkdir ~/esp && cd ~/esp
git clone https://github.com/espressif/ESP8266_RTOS_SDK.git
cd ESP8266_RTOS_SDK
git submodule update --init --recursive --progress
```
You can also use the release version as you like, as this tutorial written, the latest stable release is v3.4.

An env var need exported to find the SDK:
```
export IDF_PATH=$HOME/esp/ESP8266_RTOS_SDK
```
And you also need install some python modules the SDK required:
```
python -m pip install --user -r $IDF_PATH/requirements.txt
```

### build hello_world demo
There is some examples provided by ESP8266_RTOS_SDK, you can build the hello_world example as:
```
cd ~/esp/ESP8266_RTOS_SDK/examples/get-started/hello_world
make
```

When build hello_world first time, it will invoke `make menuconfig` to generate `sdkconfig` file, you can tune some options as your need. The `menuconfig` can be invoke by `make menuconfig`, you can use `make help` to find more usages.

After build successfully, the 'hello_world.bin/elf` will be generated at `build` dir.


## ESP8266_NONOS_SDK

Non-OS SDK is not based on an operating system. And deprecated from December 2019, but there are still a lot of users stay with Non-OS SDK

### Setup the SDK

I put the sdk in `~/esp` dir.
```
mkdir -p ~/esp && cd ~/esp
git clone https://github.com/espressif/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK.git
cd ESP8266_NONOS_SDK
git submodule update --init --recursive --progress
```

You can also use the release version as you like, as this tutorial written, the latest stable release is v3.0.5

And since all python script in Non-OS SDK is python2, you should fix the python version issue as:
```
sed -i "s/@python /@python2 /g" ~/esp/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK/Makefile
```

Not like ESP8266_RTOS_SDK, it doesn't support 'out-of-sdk' projects, you have to put your project at SDK dir, for example, use `blink-nonos` demo in this repo as example, you should put it to `~/esp/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK` dir.
```
cp -r blink-nonos ~/esp/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK
```

### Build blink-nonos demo

#### with gen_misc.sh

You can use `gen_misc.sh` to build nonos project as:

```
cd ~/esp/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK/blink-nonos
./gen_misc.sh
```
There are some questions you need answer, here I used D1 mini with 4M Flash:
```
gen_misc.sh version 20150511

Please follow below steps(1-5) to generate specific bin(s):
STEP 1: choose boot version(0=boot_v1.1, 1=boot_v1.2+, 2=none)
enter(0/1/2, default 2):
1
boot mode: new

STEP 2: choose bin generate(0=eagle.flash.bin+eagle.irom0text.bin, 1=user1.bin, 2=user2.bin)
enter (0/1/2, default 0):
1
generate bin: user2.bin

STEP 3: choose spi speed(0=20MHz, 1=26.7MHz, 2=40MHz, 3=80MHz)
enter (0/1/2/3, default 2):
3
spi speed: 80 MHz

STEP 4: choose spi mode(0=QIO, 1=QOUT, 2=DIO, 3=DOUT)
enter (0/1/2/3, default 0):
2
spi mode: DIO

STEP 5: choose spi size and map
    0= 512KB( 256KB+ 256KB)
    2=1024KB( 512KB+ 512KB)
    3=2048KB( 512KB+ 512KB)
    4=4096KB( 512KB+ 512KB)
    5=2048KB(1024KB+1024KB)
    6=4096KB(1024KB+1024KB)
    7=4096KB(2048KB+2048KB) not support ,just for compatible with nodeMCU board
    8=8192KB(1024KB+1024KB)
    9=16384KB(1024KB+1024KB)
enter (0/2/3/4/5/6/7/8/9, default 0):
4
spi size: 4096KB
spi ota map:  512KB + 512KB


start...
```

And it will start build automatically, the output looks like:
```
Support boot_v1.2 and +
Generate user2.4096.new.4.bin successully in folder bin/upgrade.
boot.bin------------>0x00000
user1.4096.new.4.bin--->0x1000
```

You can also choose `2` when 
```
STEP 2: choose bin generate(0=eagle.flash.bin+eagle.irom0text.bin, 1=user1.bin, 2=user2.bin)
```
And the final user firmware will be `user2.4096.new.4.bin` and should program to `0x81000`.

The `user1.bin` and `user2.bin` is something related to FOTA (firmware over the air), it is a update mechanism, you can treat it as AB system for now, if A running, then update B and switch to B. For this simple blink demo, use `user1.bin` or `user2.bin` or both as you like.

#### with make

```
make COMPILE=gcc BOOT=new APP=1 SPI_SPEED=80 SPI_MODE=DIO SPI_SIZE_MAP=4
```
Or use `APP=2` 
```
make COMPILE=gcc BOOT=new APP=2 SPI_SPEED=80 SPI_MODE=DIO SPI_SIZE_MAP=4
```
You may be confused which one should choose when running `gen_misc.sh` and which option should used with `make`, I will explain it next section.

**NOTE :** Partition table 

Partition table was introduced from NonOS SDK v3.0, you have to add user_pre_init() in your project, which will be called before user_init(). And you MUST call system_partition_table_regist() in user_pre_init to register your project partition table. Otherwise you may encounter rebooting loop issue with serial output `rf_cal[0] !=0x05,is 0xFF`.


# Programming

Connect the USB typec or micro port of ESP8266 devboard to USB PC port, usually there is a UART chip integrated on board and you should find `/dev/ttyACM0` or `/dev/ttyUSB0` created after devboard plugged in.

## ESP8266_RTOS_SDK
Then you can program the target device as:
```
make flash
```
Or flash just the app when you flashed this project one time already
```
make app-flash
```

`hello_world` demo is an UART demo, you can use serial terminal to monitor it, SDK provided a python tool named idf_monitor.py, you can use it as:
```
make monitor
```

The output of `hello_world` demo looks like:
```
--- idf_monitor on /dev/ttyUSB0 74880 ---
--- Quit: Ctrl+] | Menu: Ctrl+T | Help: Ctrl+T followed by Ctrl+H ---
load 0x40100000, len 7544, room 16
tail 8
chksum 0xee
load 0x3ffe8408, len 24, room 0
tail 8
chksum 0x67
load 0x3ffe8420, len 3472, room 0
tail 0
chksum 0x51
csum 0x51
I (46) boot: ESP-IDF v3.4-75-g7973d71b-dirty 2nd stage bootloader
I (46) boot: compile time 21:17:52
I (47) qio_mode: Enabling default flash chip QIO
I (55) boot: SPI Speed      : 40MHz
I (61) boot: SPI Mode       : QIO
I (67) boot: SPI Flash Size : 2MB
I (73) boot: Partition Table:
...
```

You can also use tio as:
```
tio -b 74880 /dev/ttyUSB0
```

The baudrate can be setup and found in `sdkconfig`.

## ESP8266_NONOS_SDK

After blink-nonos demo built successfully, enter `~/esp/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK/bin` dir.

You will find these files:
- boot_v1.2.bin / boot_v1.6.bin / boot_v1.7.bin, boot firmware provided by SDK.
- esp_init_data_default_v05.bin / esp_init_data_default_v08.bin, the default init data provided by SDK.
- upgrade/user1.4096.new.4.bin, user1 firmware.
- upgrade/user2.4096.new.4.bin, user2 firmware if you built it again with `APP=2`.

For first time programming:
```
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 erase_flash
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0 boot_v1.7.bin
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0x1000 upgrade/user1.4096.new.4.bin
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0x81000 upgrade/user2.4096.new.4.bin
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0x3fc000 esp_init_data_default_v08.bin
```

You can also combine these together:
```
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash \
-e -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB \
0x00000 boot_v1.7.bin \
0x1000 upgrade/user1.4096.new.4.bin \
0x81000 upgrade/user2.4096.new.4.bin \
0x3fc000 esp_init_data_default_v08.bin
```

If you already have these firmware programmed, you can only update the user firmware as:

```
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200  write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0x1000 upgrade/user1.4096.new.4.bin
```
Or
```
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200  write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0x81000 upgrade/user2.4096.new.4.bin
```

**NOTE**, the `-fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB` should match exactly what you speficied with `make` or what you input when running `gen_misc.sh` to build the project.

And let's explain some inputs to `gen_misc.sh` when building this project:

### why program user2 firmware to 0x81000 ?

We know user1 should always program to `0x1000`. why program user2 firmware to 0x81000 ?

Actually, the target address depend on flash size, you can program `boot_v1.7.bin` to target device as:

```
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 erase_flash
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB 0 boot_v1.7.bin
```

Then use tio to open the serial port:

```
tio -b 74880 /dev/ttyUSB0
```

Then reset the target device, the output should look like:
```
2nd boot version : 1.7
  SPI Speed      : 80MHz
  SPI Mode       : DIO
  SPI Flash Size & Map: 32Mbit(512KB+512KB)
no GPIO select!
jump to run user2 @ 81000
```
The line `jump to run user2 @ 81000` tell us user2 firmware should program to 0x81000. Since the start addr of user2 depends on flash size, so you need to be very careful to provide correct args for `esptool.py` when programming.

### why program `esp_init_data_default_v08.bin` to `0x3fc000` ?

It is defined by partition table introduced from NONOS SDK v3.0, refer to [blink-nonos/user/partitions.c](./blink-nonos/user/partitions.c) for more information, usually:

- 0x7c000 for 512K flash
- 0xfc000 for 1M flash
- 0x1fc000 for 2M flash
- 0x3fc000 for 4M flash

# Debugging

There is no JTAG debugging support for ESP8266, although there is [some work to openocd](https://www.esp8266.com/viewtopic.php?f=9&t=1871) already done, but as I verified, they all don't work.

You have to use UART log to debug ESP8266 as mentioned above, such as `make monitor` or `tio -b 74880 /dev/ttyUSB0`.


# Classic AT firmware for ESP8266

The latest classic AT firmware is **v1.7.5** provided by ESP8266_NONOS_SDK. Since The most common devices that use ESP8266 is ESP-1S module, I will introduce how to build and flash at firmware of ESP-1S in the first section.

For usage of classic AT firmware, please refer to official document [ESP8266 Non-OS AT Instruction Set](https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/4a-esp8266_at_instruction_set_en.pdf).

## ESP-1S

Since I don't have ESP-1 module, I will use ESP-1S as example, ESP-1S has 1M flash and ESP-1 has only 512K flash, it will affect building options, you should change it if you have a ESP-1 module.

### Check AT firmware version

Since ESP-1S module has no UART chip integrated on board, you have to use a external USB2TTL adapter and wire it up as:

| USB2TTL | ESP-1S |
|---------|--------|
| 3v3     | 3v3    |
| GND     | GND    |
| TX      | RX     |
| RX      | TX     |

NOTE, **DO NOT use 5V power supply, ESP-1S is 3V3 tolerance.**

And use tio as:
```
tio -b 115200 -m ONLCRNL /dev/ttyUSB0 
```
or picocom
```
picocom -b 115200 --omap crcrlf /dev/ttyUSB0
```
And input:
```
AT+GMR
```
The output look like :
```
AT version:1.7.5.0(Oct  9 2021 09:26:04)
SDK version:3.0.5(b29dcd3)
compile time:Mar 16 2023 13:20:21
OK
```

Here I already updated to latest v1.7.5 version. if not, you can build and update the firmware by your self.

Because AT commands must be terminated with both the CR and LF ASCII control codes, I use `-m ONLCRNL` with tio or `--omap crcrlf` with picocom, otherwise, you have to use `Ctrl-M Ctrl-J` instead of `Enter` key.


### build and flash at_nano firmware

For ESP-1S, since it has 1M flash, it can only use `at_nano` firmware which supports an SSL library with fewer ciphers but fits on 1 MB of flash memory.

You can use some ESP-1S Dock to flash ESP-1S. if you do not have one, wire it up with a USB2TTL adapter as:

| USB2TTL | ESP-1[S] |
|---------|----------|
| 3v3     | 3v3      |
| 3v3     | RST      |
| 3v3     | EN       |
| 3v3     | GPIO2    |
| GND     | GND      |
| GND     | GPIO0    |
| RX      | TX       |
| TX      | RX       |

Note again, **DO NOT use 5V power supply, ESP-1S is 3V3 tolerance.**

#### To build at_nano firmware for ESP-1S
```
cd ESP8266_NONOS_SDK
cp -r examples/at_nano . && cd at_nano
make COMPILE=gcc BOOT=new APP=1 SPI_SPEED=80 SPI_MODE=DIO SPI_SIZE_MAP=2
```

The output looks like:
```
Support boot_v1.2 and +
Generate user1.1024.new.2.bin successully in folder bin/upgrade.
boot.bin------------>0x00000
user1.1024.new.2.bin--->0x01000
```

#### to flash to ESP-1S
After `user1.1024.new.2.bin` generated, program it to ESP-1S as:
```
cd <where you put>/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK/bin
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash \
    -e \
    -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 1MB \
    0x00000 boot_v1.7.bin \
    0x01000 upgrade/user1.1024.new.2.bin \
    0xfc000 esp_init_data_default_v08.bin
```

Actually, it can be used to program to 2M or 4M flash size too.

After firemware programmed, please refer to above "Check AT firmware version" section to verify it.

I also put a copy at [esp-1s-at-firmware-v1.7.5](./esp-1s-at-firmware-v1.7.5) dir in this repo, you can use `flash-at_nano-to-esp-1s.sh` to program it to ESP-1S.

## Other 8266 devboards

It's simpler to program at firmware for various ESP8266 devboards. Most of them have a UART chip integrated, it's not necessary to care about how to wire up, and most of them has 2M or 4M flash, `at` firmware can be used instead of `at_nano`.

### build at firmware
Use d1 mini with 4M flash as example.

```
cd ESP8266_NONOS_SDK
cp -r examples/at . && cd at
make COMPILE=gcc BOOT=new APP=1 SPI_SPEED=80 SPI_MODE=DIO SPI_SIZE_MAP=6
```

The output looks like:
```
Support boot_v1.4 and +
Generate user1.4096.new.6.bin successully in folder bin/upgrade.
boot.bin------------>0x00000
user1.4096.new.6.bin--->0x01000
```

#### to flash to D1 mini
After `user1.4096.new.6.bin` generated, program it to ESP-1S as:
```
cd <where you put>/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK/bin
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 -b 115200 write_flash \
    -e \
    -fm dio --flash_freq 80m --flash_size 4MB \
    0x0000 boot_v1.7.bin \
    0x1000 upgrade/user1.4096.new.6.bin \
    0x3fc000 esp_init_data_default_v08.bin \
```

After programming finished, you can verify it by `tio -b 115200 /dev/ttyUSB0 -m ONLCRNL`:
```
$ tio -b 115200 /dev/ttyUSB0 -m ONLCRNL
[14:59:57.369] tio v2.5
[14:59:57.369] Press ctrl-t q to quit
[14:59:57.370] Connected
AT

OK

AT+GMR
AT version:1.7.5.0(Oct  9 2021 09:26:04)
SDK version:3.0.5(b29dcd3)
compile time:Mar 16 2023 13:14:07
OK
```


# AT-MQTT firmware for ESP-1S

[ESP-AT](https://github.com/espressif/esp-at) firmware for ESP8266 is newer than classic AT firmware, sometimes it also refers to `AT-MQTT` firmware. it is based on ESP8266_RTOS_SDK and the latest version is v2.2.1.0.

> v2.2.1.0_esp8266 is the last version of ESP-AT for ESP8266, corresponding to branch release/v2.2.0.0_esp8266, corresponding to documentation https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-at/en/release-v2.2.0.0_esp8266.

<strike>
  
The building process should be:
```
git clone https://github.com/espressif/esp-at.git
cd esp-at
./build.py menuconfig
```
Then you will be prompted to config some options as:
```
Platform name:
1. PLATFORM_ESP32
2. PLATFORM_ESP8266
3. PLATFORM_ESP32S2
4. PLATFORM_ESP32C3
choose(range[1,4]):2

Module name:
1. WROOM-02 (description: TX:15 RX:13)
2. WROOM-5V2L (description: 5V UART level)
3. ESP8266_1MB (description: No OTA)
4. WROOM-02-N (description: TX:1 RX:3)
5. WROOM-S2
6. ESP8266_QCLOUD (description: QCLOUD TX:15 RX:13)
choose(range[1,6]):3

Enable silence mode to remove some logs and reduce the firmware size?
0. No
1. Yes
choose(range[0,1]):0
```

After menu show up, go to `Component config -> Common ESP-related -> UART for console output` and choose `UART0 (TX1 RX3)`.

Then built it as:
```
./build.py build
```

</strike>

As I tried, I failed to build a workable firmware.

The latest workable firmware can be downloaded from ai-thinker official website with below version information:
```
AT version:2.3.0.0-dev(s-bcd64d2 - ESP8266 - Jun 23 2021 11:42:05)
SDK version:v3.4-22-g967752e2
compile time(b498b58):Jun 30 2021 11:28:20
Bin version:2.2.0(ESP8266_1MB)
```

I put a copy at [esp-1s-at-mqtt-firmware-v2.3dev](./esp-1s-at-mqtt-firmware-v2.3dev) dir in this repo, you can use `flash-at_mqtt-2.3dev-to-esp-1s.sh` to program it to ESP-1S.

After programming finished, you can verify it by `tio -b 115200 /dev/ttyUSB0 -m ONLCRNL`:
```
$ tio -b 115200 /dev/ttyUSB0 -m ONLCRNL
```
And input
```
AT+GMR

AT version:2.3.0.0-dev(s-bcd64d2 - ESP8266 - Jun 23 2021 11:42:05)
SDK version:v3.4-22-g967752e2
compile time(b498b58):Jun 30 2021 11:28:20
Bin version:2.2.0(ESP8266_1MB)

OK
```
